                  The Book of Mystic Wisdom
                as told by Philpop the Weary,
              magician to the court of his most
                   sovereign Lord British.

	Know ye, 0 seeker of the mystic wisdoms, that the ways of 
magic are diverse and strange. There exists the need for utmost 
concentration and the harvesting of things magical in order that ye 
may harness  the powers of the universe. Many are the eons of 
wisdom contained in these pages which I write for the benefit of my 
pupils, yet still there is much to learn.

        All magic is accomplished by the use of means both human 
and of nature, for true magic, is but the melding of human will and 
natural force.  Without the human voice to utter the chant, no spell 
may be cast. Yet without the proper natural catalyst, no spell may be 
effective.  Thus magic is twofold, a balance struck between nature and 
humanity. Let us examine both aspects here, beginning with those 
natural substances, known as  Reagents, that lend power to the 
words of the spellcaster.


Sulphurous Ash - Sulphur is the substance found in nature 
that is most useful in the generation of fire. It is the color of 
saffron and, when burned, gives off an odor indicative of its 
great mystic strength.  Yet its true power is to be found in the 
second burning - that is, in the use of the ashen residue of 
Sulphur that has been burned in a crucible fashioned from the 
skull of a Balron. Sulphurous Ash is not an uncommon 
substance, having been a staple of the Wizards profession 
through the ages. It may be purchased from any reputable 
purveyor of magical goods and is useful in the casting of 
Energy Fields and Magic Missiles, as well as in spells 
requiring a quick burst of light or a sustained glow.


Ginseng - Long praised for its strength giving and medicinal 
properties, the root of the Ginseng plant is immediately 
recognizable for its forked shape, and to those initiated in the 
mystic ways, by its overpowering rose-colored aura.  It has 
been used for centuries by peasants who chew it or brew tea 
from a powdered preparation of the root in order to gain 
strength and stamina as they toil in the fields.  While 
commonly found throughout Britannia, the Ginseng used as a 
component in the casting of spells is generally black in color 
and found only on the slopes of the northern mountains.  It 
may be purchased in virtually any shop that sells magical 
goods, and is most useful in spells of a healing or narcotic 
nature, such as Cure or Sleep enchantments.


Garlic - Even the most common of nature's gifts to our 
people have magical properties as can be witnessed by the 
power of Garlic. This pungent bulb is found in every garden 
in the lands of Britannia, and no stew or roast would be 
complete without its sharp flavor. Its aromatic nature makes 
Garlic a powerful reagent in the casting of magical spells, and 
it is used in all spells of the warding variety - be they the 
warding off of common and magical sickness or the repelling 
of beings once dead.


Spider Silk - The miracle of Spider Silk lies in its tensile 
strength. Imagine, if you will, a grown man relying on a 
strand of catgut to hold his weight all the days of his life. A 
spider relies on the finest of threads to do just that, and its 
silk never fails it. We should praise the first wizardling who 
realized the mystic secret of Spider Silk, for it is to him or her 
that we owe the knowledge of binding and restraining spells. 
The silk of the deadly Albino Ghoul spider - both the 
miniature  and giant varieties - has been used by adepts 
through the years in rites of magic. The spider farms of the 
south produce perhaps a hundred pounds of the substance 
year and sell it to the merchants of magic, where it is made 
available to all who ply our trade. It is said that each year one 
worker dies the horrible death incurred by the bite of the 
Albino Ghoul spider to ensure the potency of the silk, 
although never has this deliberately been made to happen.


Blood Moss - is the bane of farmers and the boon of 
magicians. It is a deep red fungus that attacks the crops of 
those who raise grain, yet it is a vital component in the 
casting of spells. An oddity to those who spend their lives 
observing the growth of that which is not animal in nature -
for it behaves like no other plant or mushroom - Blood Moss 
grows only in the driest of times, when all around it is 
perishing from drought. It cannot survive the absence of 
direct sunlight, and thus passes from the earth each night, 
only to return when the sun blazes mercilessly upon the land. 
Blood Moss seems feed only in ripening grain - it can lay 
waste to an acre of corn in a single day and vanish without a 
trace as night falls, leaving naught but fruitless stalks 
swaying in the cool, night breeze.  The magic of Blood Moss 
is thought to reside in its fleeting nature, for it is used in the 
spells of movement -from the simplest levitation to making 
the very earth tremble.  As harvest time comes each year, the 
merchants send runners to wait by the fields and gather the 
Blood Moss.  Farmers consider these runners unlucky and try 
to chase them from their fields, but enough show persistence 
to ensure their masters a plentiful supply of Blood Moss to 
sell. 


Black Pearl - The Black Pearl is the most highly prized of all 
the pearls. Well-formed ones command a price from jewelers 
that would bankrupt a score of wizards.  Yet Black Pearls are 
vital in the casting of spells that are hurled from the mage's 
person and must travel to a final destination. Fortunately for 
our profession, even rarer than a normal Black Pearl is one 
that is perfectly shaped.  Most are lopsided and lack 
symmetry - the very quality that makes the jeweler desire 
them so highly. This ensures a ready supply for the 
thaumaturge - the weaver of magic. It is said that, unlike the 
ordinary pearl which is formed inside an oyster when it seeks 
to protect itself from a piece of sand or grit, the Black Pearl 
only forms when the seed of the great pearl is yet another 
pearl of much smaller size cast adrift by the death of another 
oyster.

Nightshade - Not to be confused with the rank-smelling plant 
of the same name, the Nightshade used in the mystic arts is 
an extremely rare mushroom that is only found in the deepest, 
most remote forests. It is said to be quite venomous to the 
touch of all save those present at its harvest, thus it is never 
sold in shops and is among the scarcest of magical reagents.  
To obtain it, one must seek in the deepest forest on the 
blackest of nights when not even a moonbeam illuminates a 
single blade of grass.  I know not of the precise locations 
where this mystic fungus can be found, but there are rumored 
to be those in the lands of Britannia that know this secret.  Its 
chief magical properties are connected with the use of poison 
and the creation of illusions so real that they can lay the 
mightiest warrior to the ground. So rare is the Nightshade 
that it is primarily used in the creation Of only the most 
potent of magics. 

Mandrake Root - The root of the poisonous Mandrake plant 
is instantly recognizable by its human shape and its crimson 
color. It is said that the sap runs blood-red when the plant is 
cut down in order to harvest the root.  Long prized for its 
narcotic and purging effects when consumed in minute 
portions, the Mandrake Root is the most powerful known 
substance in the weaving of magical spells that give new 
shape to very world around us.  The variety of Mandrake Root 
used in the mystic arts is found only in marshy terrain, where 
the root can thrust deeply into the earth. The more earth that 
must be moved to retrieve the Mandrake Root, the more 
potent its effect in the magic of the finder. Many years ago, 
when our people were but scattered tribes of nomads, the 
Mandrake was plentiful. As our people have tamed the land, 
however, and the practice of the mystic arts has become 
refined, the Mandrake has all but vanished from the face of 
the land we now call Britannia. It is never seen in the shops 
of the towns and castles, and hardly even sold privately if 
found.  Many of our profession have devoted lifetimes to the 
search for Mandrake Root without ever coming into 
possession of a single piece of it. 


These then are the eight mystic reagents used in the weaving 
of enchantments.  Some are readily available, while others are 
costly or must be hunted and harvested by the mage that 
intends to use them. Guard well your supply of these magical 
components for without them there can be no magic.  Use 
them wisely, as ye must use the forces that they unleash.  
Remember that Magic is to be used only for the cause of 
righteousness and for the greater good.  Should you use the 
mystic arts for personal gain or vengeance, be prepared for 
the desertion of your powers.

Awaken - Should you or any of your followers ever be so 
unfortunate as to come under the influence of a magically 
induced slumber, the use of a Spell of Awakening will often 
alleviate the condition. It is a simple spell which may be cast 
by the beginning student of the mystic arts with little effort or 
cost. It requires the use of Ginseng for its healing qualities 
and Garlic in order to ward off the coming of sleep until the 
victims body has returned to its normal cycle of wakefulness 
and rest.  Blend the two reagents carefully and apply the 
mixture to the brow of your sleeping companion and chant 
"levate" loudly.

Blink - Many are the occasions that the thaumaturge needs to 
be elsewhere in very short order and finds that neither horse 
nor ship nor any other conventional form of travel is of 
sufficient promptness for the situation.  Magical means of 
travel must then be used, of which the Blink spell is the most 
common. This spell disassembles the mage and companions 
and reassembles them at a spot many leagues distant in any 
chosen direction.  There are means of travel that cover far 
greater distances than the Blink, but they are far more costly 
and have other limitations which we shall examine later in 
this tome. The Blink can only move the party distances 
perceptible to the mind of a common person.
The components needed for the casting of a Blink 
spell are Spider Silk and Blood Moss.  The binding powers of 
the Spider Silk prevent the essence of the travelers from being 
scattered during transit, while the Blood Moss aids in the 
movement from one location to the next.  Equal quantities of 
each reagent ensure the proper working of the enchantment.  
The concentration required for Blinking is such that the 
spellcaster will most certainly fell the effects, but not be left 
exhausted.

Cure - Venomous creatures abound throughout the lands of 
Britannia.  Rarely are they evil, nature having provided them 
with their sting as a means of defense against larger 
predators, but without proper attention wounds can fester and 
lead to the death of a victim.  Furthermore, evil mages may 
cast noxious, poisonous energy fields during battle or erect 
such barriers to prevent the virtuous from reaching their 
caches or sanctuaries.  Fortunately, the great wizard Jaanth 
Nor devised a countering magic for the effects of all venom 
and recorded his findings for future generations to use.  The 
Cure spell is effected by the use of a mixture of Garlic and 
Ginseng and the calling of the victim's name to soothe 
envenomed soul.  The curative powers of the Ginseng nullify 
the effects of the poison in the victim's system, while the use 
of Garlic wards off the return of any virulent residues that 
may lie dormant in the blood. 

Dispel - One of the staples of the wizard's profession is the 
use of energy fields. We shall discuss the casting of such 
fields shortly, but first let us examine the means of 
dismantling them when they are encountered. Although there 
are various forms of such fields, they are all created with a 
similar magic and thus may be Dispelled with a single spell. 
The Dispel enchantment is one of moderate difficulty, far 
more exhausting than the creation of energy fields. Often 
touching the field may prove disastrous, so the enchantment 
must be cast from afar and thus required the use of the 
precious Black Pearl needed in all projectile spells.  
Furthermore, Sulphurous Ash is needed to provide the flash 
of power that beings the dissolution of the forces holding the 
field together. Finally, the warding powers of Garlic are also 
employed to prevent the forces from reassembling at the spot 
where they were previously concentrated. To effect the spell, 
speak backwards the color of the type of field encountered.

Energy Field - There are four types of Energy Fields known 
to the practitioner of the mystic arts: Sleep, Poison, Fire, and 
lightning. Their effects are varied, but the magic used to erect 
them is the same in each instance. Any person attempting to 
pass through an Energy Field will run the risk of either 
falling asleep or being poisoned in the case of the first two 
types; if the field is of Fire then their flesh shall burn as they 
pass through and they shall feel much pain and anguish; 
while the field composed of  Lightning is impenetrable. The 
casting of Energy Fields is not difficult and requires only a 
small exertion on the part of the spellcaster, but the fields are 
only effective in enclosed areas such as subterranean passages 
and inside of rooms.  The reagents necessary in the casting of 
these Energy Fields are Sulphurous Ash for the burst of 
creation, Spider Silk for the binding of forces to a single spot, 
and Black Pearl for the launching of the spell to a spot away 
from he who works the magic. It would be a grave error 
indeed to cast such a spell without the latter component for 
you would find yourself in the midst of the field!

Fireball - When beset upon by evil, the spellcaster has many 
offensive tools at his or her disposal. We have discussed some 
of the indirect magics such as Energy Fields, but there are 
times when more direct action is required. There is a class of 
missile spells for such occasions, of which the Fireball spell is 
the intermediate one.  All such spells call for the use of the 
precious Black Pearl for its power in the launching of 
projectiles.  In the case of the Fireball, Sulphurous Ash is also 
called for in equal proportion, for its powers of fire-flash are 
integral to the creation of flaming missiles. Speak the name 
of your enemy when the spell is cast and your aim shall be 
unerring and your enemy will be devastated by the flames of 
the magical fires.

Gate Travel - In the repertoire of teleportation 
enchantments, Gate Travel is by far the most powerful. This 
is because it not only utilizes the reagents and chants of most 
magics, but also the power of the gates of the moons that 
control the very oceans and tides. The moongates are located 
throughout Britannia, and appear only at certain phases of the 
twin moons Trammel and Felucca. To cast the spell of Gate 
Travel, one must speak the name of the moons as the reagents 
are stirred. As the enchantment takes effect, the spellcaster 
and any companions will be instantly carried to the location 
of the desired moongate.
It has been a long-standing tradition among the 
practitioners of the mystic arts to zealously guard the secret of 
the components of the Gate Travel spell. It is said that 
revealing these reagents will seal the use of the gates to the 
one who divulged the key. Of course, none have dared to 
speak of them for fear of losing one of the most powerful and 
exhausting spells in the lore of enchantment.  This writer is 
no exception to this belief.

Heal - 0ne of the cornerstones of the good and true path of 
the wizard is the use of enchantment for beneficial ends.  We 
have discussed the Cure spell which renders venom as 
harmless as the purest of well water, but the most common 
form of injury is the physical wound rather than the internal 
disruption brought on by poison.  Swords and talons do not 
discriminate and the tools of justice are oft used for unjust 
purposes. When you or your companions have suffered 
physical injury that hath rent or seared the flesh, the Heal 
spell is invaluable.  Mix similar quantities of the healing 
essence of Ginseng with integrating strength of Spider Silk 
and apply it to the wound. Speak the name of the victim and 
the flesh will be hastened along the road to wholeness.

Iceball - Once again, the invaluable Black Pearl is the key to 
the casting of the missile spells, of which the Iceball is the 
second most potent in the mage's arsenal. Unlike the 
previously discussed Fireball spell, the Iceball requires only 
the use of Mandrake Root in conjunction with the Black 
Pearl. The necromantic Mandrake will bring the chill of the 
grave upon your enemy and the very blood of the victim will 
freeze as  if it were midwinter. Ice is heavy and the toll of 
casting this spell is equally weighty.  All but the sturdiest of 
our profession will needs take rest after casting but a pair of 
these potent enchantments.  Remember to speak the name of 
your intended victim as you cast the reagents aloft, lest your 
efforts be for naught.

Jinx - There are but two enchantments more powerful and 
difficult than the Jinx spell, and but one of similar potency.  
When faced with a closely packed horde of enemies, mix 
together equal quantities  of Black Pearl, deadly Nightshade, 
and the crimson Mandrake Root to cast at your opponents.  
Call to their attention the vulnerability of their backs and 
weave the magic.  They shall turn and smite each other as if 
each was alone in a crowd of mortal foes. The Black Pearl 
shall carry your spell to their very midst, while the 
hallucinatory might of the Nightshade will confound them 
beyond the boundaries of common sense.  Mandrake Root 
lends the power of conviction to their misconceptions.  The 
duration of the enchantment is varied, but throughout its 
course the spellcaster will be reminded of its potency by the 
presence of a glowing "J". Be warned, however, that the 
casting of the Jinx spell requires great exertion.

Kill - The Kill spell is the most powerful of the missile 
enchantments. It is the favorite of evil wizards and its use is 
prohibited by most teachers of the mystic arts.  Nevertheless, 
when faced with a foe of singular strength and a truly evil 
nature, the wise magician will prepare a mixture of the highly 
toxic Nightshade and mercurial Black Pearl and speak the 
True-name of the enemy while casting the reagents toward 
the foe.  As the last syllable of the chant fades, all of the 
target's vital organs shall cease to function for the space of 
seven heartbeats.  This is usually fatal, although some beings 
of exceptionally hardy constitution will survive a single Kill 
spell. The enchantment may be woven several times, but tales 
a fierce toll on the energy and concentration of the caster. It is 
easier to Dispel a field of vibrant energy than it is to stop the 
functioning of a living being.

Light - The enchantment of Light is a trivial one, often the 
very first spell acquired by the budding sorcerer. It requires 
but a pinch of Sulphurous Ash, which is applied to the end of 
a staff and gently blown upon until it begins to glow with a 
soft yellow light. The spellcaster must concentrate briefly on 
the image of a candle and expend a slight amount of energy 
to start the magical glow. From then on it will burn softly 
until the reagent is consumed, lighting the underground 
passages where the thaumaturge treads. There are two 
principal advantages to the use of Light spells in place of 
ordinary torches. They are unaffected by all but magical 
winds or breezes; and they do not smoke and cause one's eyes 
to smart.  Many a warrior has suffered grievously because his 
eyes were shut by the sting of a wealth of tears.

Magic Missile - There are generally very few if any spells 
that are learned early in the practice of wizardry which are 
both useful and eagerly sought after by those dabbling in the 
mystic arts.  The beginning thaumaturge almost always 
yearns for spells that devastate or create startling effects. The 
weaving of weather or the mastery of short vertical 
teleportations do not impress onlookers.  The one simple spell 
that does truly inspire awe at little expense to the spellcaster 
is the Magic Missile. It requires the use of two parts of 
Sulphurous Ash to one part of Black Pearl in the casting, and 
it will cause a tremendous bright flash of blue light to strike 
an enemy.  While not visibly marked, the enemy will sustain 
a fair amount of internal damage, said by the cynical to be 
brought about by fright more than by power. The Magic 
Missile is a useful enchantment in battle, but it is more 
spectacular than effective and will not deter most enemies 
larger than the spellcaster who wields it.

Negate - When faced with a greater or more telling magic 
than one's own, the practitioner of the mystic arts may decide 
it best for all involved to suspend everyone's use of 
thaumaturgy for a short time. At this time one should invoke 
the powers of the Negate spell by mixing Garlic with its 
warding characteristics together with the exotic Mandrake 
ripe with mystic potency. To this blend add but an equal 
amount of Sulphurous Ash to provide the spark of fusion and 
speak your own name backwards. All magic shall instantly 
cease save the enchantment of Negation itself, which is 
manifested by the vision of a glowing "N" hovering before 
your eyes. he Negate spell will last only a brief time, which 
should be used for either the annihilation of your enemies or 
for the judicious removal of your presence from the troubled 
spot.

Open - There was once a time when all beings were fair and 
just. The principal vessel used for the transport of one's 
worldly possessions in these times was the wooden chest, 
which is still the popular means.  But since the coming of the 
evil ones and their lasting influence on the inhabitants of our 
fair land, the practice of placing obnoxious and sometimes 
lethal traps on the locks of chests has become quite 
commonplace. Virtually all folk use such devices, even the 
denizens of the underworld who guard naught but ill-gotten 
wealth.  To bypass these sinister mechanisms the 
thaumaturge need but utter the chant "Appar Unem" and 
sprinkle a mix of Sulphurous Ash and Blood Moss on the 
offending lock. The flash of the Sulphurous Ash powers the 
movement potential of the Blood Moss and the lock will open 
itself safely, leaving the contents of the chest at the disposal 
of the spellcaster.

Protection - There are times during the heat of battle when 
one finds the best form of offense to be naught but a good 
defense. When hard-pressed by fierce antagonists, the wise 
magician will mix together the reagents Sulphurous Ash, 
Ginseng, and Garlic and invoke the spell of Protection. The 
wholesome qualities of the Ginseng, together with the 
repellent strength of the Garlic, serve to shield the wizard and 
all companions from the onslaught of their enemies.  Such 
Protection is not always effective, but may be of great use. 
Sulphurous Ash provides the mystic fire that fuels the 
incantation, and also serves to startle one's opponents with an 
initial flash as the spell begins to function. Protection is not a 
simple spell, but neither is it an exceptionally strenuous spell 
to cast. Its duration is short, and during the course of its 
shielding the mage will be reminded of its effects by a 
glowing "P" hovering before his or her eyes.

Quickness - The spell of Quickness is one of the most 
unpredictable yet potent spells in the wizards collection of 
enchantments, and one of the most telling on his or her 
companions.  When cast during battle, the Quickness spell 
will heighten the natural dexterity of one's fellows to such a 
degree that they will move with twice their normal agility - at 
times they will be able to land two blows against their foes 
instead of the customary single strike during a round combat.  
The price is age, for the recipients of the extra speed incurred 
by the use of Quickness will age briefly while under the sway 
of the enchantment...yet most feel that an occasional gray hair 
is but a small price to pay for the advantage of dealing twice 
the number of blows that one might receive. The reagents for 
the Quickness spell are fiery  Sulphurous Ash, Ginseng, and 
volatile Blood Moss.  The Blood Moss portion is double the 
others, for movement is the critical aspect of the spell. The 
Sulphurous Ash lends the flashes of energy needed by the 
beneficiaries of the enchantment, while the healing powers of 
Ginseng prevent them from aging so rapidly as to become 
gray-beards after a single encounter.  Throughout the course 
of the Quickness spell, the spellcaster will be reminded of its 
effects by the vision of a bright, glowing "Q".

Resurrect - Many are the monsters and terrors that dwell 
beneath the surface or in the forests and marshes of Britannia.  
Even groups of most valiant and fierce warriors are subject to 
losses too tragic to bear. If a companion is slain by an enemy, 
all is not lost in the presence of the most accomplished of 
mages. There exists the means to bring back a companion 
from the land of the dead - not as an unholy once-dead being 
- but as a living, breathing creature of flesh and blood 
restored to life, albeit in an extremely weakened condition. 
Each wizard must needs determine the components of this 
enchantment that work best u4th their own magic, for the 
combination is said to be unique to each spellcaster. What is 
known about weaving this the most potent of all 
enchantments is that it requires the spellcaster to scatter the 
reagents to cover the victim's body, white calling out the 
name of the slain companion in a voice of thunder. This 
magic is extraordinarily taxing, and rare is the mage who can 
continue to weave spells without rest once this enchantment 
has been successful cast.

Sleep - There are moments in the lives of every practitioner 
of the mystic arts where discretion is truly the better part of 
valor. Not all foes are truly evil and deserving of annihilation 
- verily, some are but beasts of the field seeking provender 
and are entitled to life as much as you or I. Yet, unchecked 
these creatures pose as great a threat to one as a score of rabid 
Orcs.  It is in such situations that the wise thaumaturge 
weaves a Sleep spell and leaves his opposition in deep 
slumber whilst vacating the current location.  The Sleep spell 
is truly a serious enchantment that requires a fair amount of 
mental energy to cast, but it is not of such import as to leave 
the Spellcaster breathless or exhausted. To send your foes to 
land of slumber, mix a double portion of Spider Silk with 
some Ginseng and chant "Duerme" as you sprinkle the 
reagents into the air.  Fear not the distance between you and 
the intended victims, for the binding power of the Spider Silk  
will enfold them from afar, while the healing Ginseng will 
gently wrap them in deep sleep.

Tremor - The Tremor spell is a very potent magic indeed. 
Few spells are as exhausting and none save Resurrection have 
a more striking or dramatic effect. Carefully blend portions of 
Sulphurous Ash with Blood Moss and Mandrake Root and 
cast it at the feet of your opponents whilst shouting as loudly 
as possible. The volatile Sulphurous Ash shall furnish the 
flash of power to the movement potential of the Blood Moss 
and the Mandrake Root will lend raw necromantic force to 
the spell. The very earth will tremble and quake beneath the 
feet of your enemies and they will fly in terror, save those that 
are swallowed up entirely by the very ground itself. No spell 
in the lore of the mystic arts has as much power to strike fear 
into the hearts and minds of those that suffer its mighty 
impact.  But use this enchantment wisely for it will leave you 
as weak as a newborn babe.

Undead - Ever since the coming of the evil  wizard Mondain 
and his hellish offspring,, the lands of Britannia have been 
plagued by the return of creatures already slain. These once-
dead beings take many forms, the most common being the 
animated skeletons of Orcs and goblins, or the ghoulish forms 
of flesh-eating corpses that have been summoned from the 
land of shades to wreak havoc on the living. These 
apparitions are cowed by the light of righteousness and fight 
as warriors in a trance.  Nonetheless, they are hard to kill and 
never tire in battle and thus may jeopardize even a seasoned 
band of adventurers. Each mage knows a form of turning 
them aside when encountered, but the components of such 
magics are personal and depend on the spellcaster. You must 
use your knowledge of the properties of magical reagents to 
determine which two will lend force to your enchantment of 
Undead turning. When you have found the proper mixture, 
cast it at your foes while chanting the name of what the 
creatures once were when they trod the earth in life.

View - The lands that we now call Britannia in honor of the 
wise and just influence of Lord British are vast in scope and 
hold many uncharted regions. Although cartographers have 
traveled all the circumference of the main continent, many 
internal tracts have yet to be accurately recorded, while there 
are numerous islands rumored to exist to the southeast with 
nary a chart to show their location. Here the practitioner of 
the mystic arts has a great advantage over the wanderer or 
seafarer in that the View spell may be woven when the need 
arises. The View incantation is of middling difficulty and 
involves the use of hallucinatory Nightshade and powerful 
Mandrake Root. Mandrake lends power to the enchantment 
while Nightshade provides a mystic overview of all the land 
within the range of a simple Blink spell. Simply blend the 
reagents and speak out the name of the region through which 
you travel.

Wind Change - Not all Britannia is accessible on foot, and 
oft times the wizard will find the need to embark on a sea 
voyage to reach some certain destinations in the pursuit of 
Truth. Once aboard ship, most voyagers find themselves at 
the mercy of capricious nature with her ever-changing winds. 
This is not true for the practitioner of the mystic arts, 
however, for through magical means one may control the very 
direction of the wind, albeit for but a short span of time. 
Wind Change is not a taxing enchantment; indeed a powerful 
wizard can cast it almost continuously, although it is not so 
trivial as opening trapped chests or effecting minor 
teleportations...Simply mix Sulphurous ash for power and 
Blood Moss for movement to coax the wind to a more 
favorable direction. Speak the name of the patron of winds 
and call out the direction desired and the winds shall change 
at your bidding.

Xit - When trapped in the bowels of the earth, weary and 
battered with a long road to the surface, the use of an Xit 
(exit) spell can be beneficial. This enchantment is but one of 
the middling forms of teleportation, quite similar in cost and 
nature to the Blink spell. It too disassembles the party and 
reassembles it on the surface of Britannia, and thus requires 
very similar components to the aforementioned Blink 
enchantment. Aside from the moving Blood Moss and the 
binding Spider Silk which ensures the safe passage of the 
disincorporated party, Xit requires the use of Sulphurous Ash 
to provide the flare that guides the party from the depths of 
darkness to the world of sunlight. When casting the Xit spell, 
the thaumaturge should try to envision the actual entrance to 
the underworld used to gain the subterranean passages at the 
beginning of the expedition below ground. Successful casting 
of the Xit spell will surely return them to that selfsame spot.

Y (UP) - The two most elementary forms of teleportation both 
have strange names and may be used only when underground. 
The more difficult of the two is known by the letter "Y" in 
honor of the mage Yenthak Gnor, who first crafted the 
enchantment. Yenthak Gnor discovered that a blend of Blood 
Moss and Spider Silk in conjunction with the spoken names 
of the moons would cause one who utters it to be lifted 
upward through the very soil to the next highest level of a 
dungeon. The Spider Silk holds the party together during 
their transit, while the Blood Moss moves them ever closer to 
the moons.

Z (DOWN) - The "Z" or Down spell is perhaps the simplest 
of all the teleportation spells.  It requires the same 
components as the "Y" or Up spell - these being Blood Moss 
for movement and Spider Silk for its binding qualities - but 
requires half the mental energy and concentration on the part 
of the spellcaster due to the natural tendency of all bodies to 
move downward. The origin of the name is uncertain, but it is 
believed that the letter "Z" is the first letter of the 
unpronounceable True-name of the Lord of the Underworld, a 
demon of much power. To effect the spell, the spellcaster 
must scatter the reagents and chant  "Baja" in stentorian 
tones. The lower the tonality of the chant, the higher the 
probability of the party moving down one level of a dungeon.

CHAPTER I

POLITCAL HISTORY
The Dark Ages of Britannia is the name given to that long 
span of time when the infamous Triad Of Evil stalked the 
lands and challenged all for the supremacy of the soul.
The First Era of the Dark Ages came to an end with 
the downfall of the evil Wizard Mondain and his many 
minions, as chronicled in Ultima I. The Lords of the land 
were weak and scattered, rendered ineffective by factional 
wars. It was only through the valiant efforts of an itinerant 
adventurer that the foul Mondain was tracked to his hidden 
lair and slain. 
But a few years of restless peace followed Mondain's 
downfall. So long had the world shuddered beneath 
Mondain's yoke that many found it hard to  believe he had 
been really vanquished. In truth, his teachings did not 
disappear.  Mondain's apprentice Minax rose to power soon 
thereafter to challenge the fledgling city-states that were 
beginning to evolve. The Terrors had begun anew.
Minax's powers upon maturity greatly exceeded 
those of her evil  mentor. With these powers she was able to 
rain wholesale destruction upon the planet, twisting and 
corrupting everything. Her foul web spread through time 
itself, ensnaring all who sought to oppose her. Finally, there 
arose a hero out of legend who dared face Minax in her own 
fiery castle and destroy her. Thus ended the Second Era of 
Darkness, as told in Ultima II.

Twenty years of well-earned tranquillity ensued and 
prosperity favored the land. Then disturbing omens appeared, 
followed by the mysterious appearance of a fiery island. The 
tale of the Third Era of the Dark Ages is told by Iolo the Bard 
in Ultima III - wherein Lord British, sovereign of an incipient 
empire in the land of Sosaria, called forth through time and 
space for Heroes of the People to assemble. Four diverse 
adventurers answered the clarion call. To them fell the geas 
of the Doom of Exodus. Long they labored on the trail of the 
mysterious Exodus, through many a deep dungeon which 
seared their souls. To this day, each member of that team 
bears the marks of their journey. With the air of the mystical 
Time Lord they were successful in bypassing the Great Earth 
Serpent and gaining access to Exodus' island fortress. The 
very bricks of the fortress rose up against them, and great is 
the Bard's tale of their struggle to reach their mortal foe. Of 
the final confrontation not one of them will speak, save to say 
that the evil is gone from this plane. So passed the third 
member of the Triad of Evil and with this death, so passed 
the Dark Ages of Britannia.
From the rubble of Sosaria, Lord British was able to 
unite all the mainland and a few of the islands under his one 
rule. This new Empire of Britannia brought much sought-
after peace and prosperity to its subjects. Many of the ancient 
pockets of evil were destroyed, so that the only remaining 
hazard to wayfarers was the occasional stray band of 
marauding Orcs or hill giants. Most of the lands were 
mapped, although a few unexplored regions still remain. 
With the Triad of Evil destroyed, Lord British became known 
for his dedication to raising the quality of life of his subjects. 
To assist in this endeavor, three mighty structures were raised 
in distant parts of the realm. One was the Lycaeum, wherein 
lay the great observatory. Another was the Empath Abbey 
with its oak groves where wise men and women meditated 
upon the teachings of the ancients. The third structure was 
the great castle of the Knight's Order of the Silver Serpent. 
Only the flower of Lord British's chivalry was invited to join 
this order, which embodied the highest ideals and exemplary 
bravery. The rest of the land was divided among eight major 
towns, each with its own political faction. Numerous satellite 
villages also dotted the countryside between the towns. In this 
manner were Lord British's lands organized.


CHAPTER II

GEOGRAPHY
The final destruction of Exodus rocked the known world. 
Mountains rose; land masses sank. Most of the surface area of 
the world became fused together into one large mass. It is 
over this major continent - now called Britannia - that Lord 
British rules. Some nearby islands also pay homage to him, 
while beyond these islands lurk uncharted shoals and 
rumored pockets of evil.
Lord British's magnificent castle is situated in the 
center of the continent, overlooking Britanny Bay. This tall 
building is the greatest architectural structure of the new age. 
Loyal subjects may pay homage to his majesty, and renew 
fealty whenever they are in the vicinity of his castle. Nearby 
lies the arts center of Britannia - the town of Britain - were 
Bards weave tales of legendary deeds and serenade visitors.
To the north of the castle of Lord British lies the 
great mountain range, known as the Serpent's Spine. The 
peaks of this range are the highest in all Britannia. During 
the summer months, a small out-of-the-way pass allows 
knowledgeable travelers to save much time on their journeys. 
Beware of the one-eyes Cyclops and fierce, two-headed Ettins 
that inhabit this range.
Northwest from the mountains begin the vast woods 
known as the Deep Forest. Many a traveler has become lost 
among these tall, majestic trees. If thy feet stray from the 
beaten path, do not despair, for within the woods  lies the 
beautiful city of Yew, home of the mystic Druids. The High 
Court of Yew judges all the important cases in Britannia and 
is famed far and wise for the wisdom of the decisions 
rendered here.
Nearby is the spiritual center of Britannia, the 
famous Empath Abbey. Within these hallowed walls, wise 
men and women study the ancient writings of  past Masters, 
and meditate upon the Great Principles that govern the 
universe. A good meditation - focusing on a proper Mantra - 
will sometimes yield valuable visions to those whose patience 
and powers of concentration are strong. The experience is 
well worth sampling.
East of the Deep Forest lie the High Steppes of 
Britannia, famous for beautiful horses. The only difficulties a 
traveler might encounter here are bands of thieving Rogues 
and unfriendly Wizards. The High Steppes border an interior 
lake fables for mysterious disturbances.
Beyond the High Steppes lies the famous battlefield, 
know as the Bloody Plains, where the last major forces of evil 
were vanquished. Alas, many of our brace men perished here 
in the fight for virtue. Be very careful when thou passeth 
through this region. It is whispered that, at some phases of 
the moon, the undead rise and fight the battle again.

Lost Hope Bay lies to the north of here, with the 
sturdy town of Minoc perched on its shore. Minoc is home to 
some of the finest craftsmen in the realm. The Tinkers of 
Minoc are known far and wide for their skill. A  tired traveler 
will also find a refreshing place to rest at the Wayfarer's Inn. 
The northeaster tip of Britannia is rather wild. The 
treacherous marshes, with the noxious vapors that poison the 
unwary explorer, are home to swarms of large insects and all 
manner of vile beasts. 
South of Lord British's castle can be found a large 
plain, mountains, and a dense forest. On the southern edge of 
the continent is the magnificent  town of Trinsic, from 
whence come Lord British's finest Paladins. The Tap in town 
has some of the best brew around, and the bartender is a great 
source of current gossip. Be sure to tip him well!
The claws of the southern tip of Britannia embrace 
the Cape of Heroes. Slightly to the west lie the Valarian Isles. 
The walled town of  Jhelom provides Lord British with the 
best fighters and also has the largest inn of the realm, where 
the service is outstanding.
The headquarters for the Order of the Silver Serpent 
is on an island south of the Cape of Heroes. This wooded 
fortress was given to the members of  the Order by Lord 
British in recognition of their outstanding service. A visit to 
Serpent Castle will instill within the traveler a true feeling for 
the ways of chivalry.
Off the western shore of Britannia is the island home 
of the doughty Rangers. Skara Brae is a beautiful city and 
spaciously laid out. For those suffering from rare diseases or 
grievous wounds, a Mystical Healer resides within those 
walls. The Healer will air the destitute as readily as the 
wealth, expecting no payment save what the sufferer can 
afford.
In the northeaster part of Britannia lies Verity Isle, 
famous as the home of the Lycaeum. This pillar of higher 
learning constitutes the center for the sharpening of the finest 
minds in Britannia. The Lycaeum's observatory provides Lord 
British with valuable information about the course of the  
heavens and provides a vantage point to watch the 
happenings within his realm. On the southern end of Verity is 
situated the fabled town of Moonglow. The Magi of 
Moonglow are constantly improving their skills, being tireless 
in the pursuit of greater knowledge of the mystic arts. Within 
Moonglow, however, can be obtained the finest in mystical 
reagents. These herbs will help those with magical skills 
prepare and cast their spells.
This then is the known realm of Britannia. Several 
small villages also dot the landscape, but all are not  recorded 
in the charts of the realm. Some other islands of varying 
significance hug the shoreline - most of which are 
uninhabited and barren. The only islands the traveler should 
be cautious about when exploring are known as the Fens of 
the Dead. Disembodied Wisps, Ghosts, long-dead Lichs, and 
savage Zorns have been reported here.
Existing maps are by no means complete. There are 
said to be other unexplored isles, wherein all manner of 
monsters and evil beings reside: flame-breathing Dragons, 
multi-headed Hydras, horned Devils, fiery Lava Lizards and 
even dreaded Balrons are rumored to roam the distant shores. 
Somewhere, out beyond civilization, is also reputed to lie the 
ruins of the legendary town of Magincia, which the gods 
destroyed for the insufferable pride of those that dwelt there. 
All of the magnificent marble palaces and gardens were 
devastated, and the rich, haughty inhabitants reduced to 
haunting spirits. No one has ever confirmed this legend, so it 
may just be a fable to frighten the weak of heart and instill 
humility in those that overvalue their own worth.
Sea travel along the coast of the main continent is 
reasonable safe, although a bold band of pirates has been 
raiding Britannia of late, terrorizing the populace. Beware, 
for the pirates take no prisoners! Farther out to sea roam 
many mythical creatures. The unwary voyager will likely 
encounter Giant Squids, Nixies, poisonous Serpents, and 
mystical Seahorses. The ever-present danger of whirlpools 
and waterspouts make seafaring a hazardous experience at 
best.
It is hoped that with the next edition of the History of 
Britannia, travelers will have brought back more information 
one these unexplored regions, so that the map may be 
completely filled in. As a final caution for the would be 
traveler - Beware of the many Dungeons and their dark, 
subterranean passages!


CHAPTER III

FELLOWSHIP
Under Lord British's rule, each of the eight towns has 
developed into a cultural center for one of the eight major 
professions. In this manner, an orderly society has evolved 
with little friction between the diverse inhabitants. No one is 
restricted to their town of birth, and one frequently finds 
people of various professions, visiting a particular town. 

These are the eight major professions:

MAGE:   The Magi of Britannia gather in Moonglow, near 
the Lycaeum, where they can study the ancient mystical 
scrolls of the Library. The strictures of their profession permit 
Magi to wear only cloth armour and carry either a staff, 
dagger, or sling. Unconfirmed rumors indicate that the 
highest Adepts have acquired the use of arcane magical 
weapons. The primary weapon of the Mage, of course, is 
magic. As the Mage becomes more advanced, more powerful 
spells can be woven. Some of the greatest spells have been 
known to literally shake the earth, or raise the dead!

BARD:   The Bards of Britain entertain the people with their 
wonderful ballads and tales of heroic deeds. Bards not only 
chronicle the deeds of valor, but perform them as well. The 
weapon of choice for a Bard is the sling, but they may use a 
crossbow at times. All armour save that of Leather is shunned 
by these minstrels, for they find metal harsh and too noisy for 
their sensitive ears. The Bard also dabbles in magic and 
makes a fine companion on a long journey.

FIGHTER: From the town of Jhelom hail the mighty 
Fighters. They pass their lives in training and have the use of 
all weapons and armour, though most prefer the use of the 
double-edged Britannian sword, a devastating weapon in the 
hands of a skilled fencer. Fighters have little or no magical 
talents, for they believe only in the use of arms and fear that 
magical training saps the will and concentration of a true 
warrior. They posses a particular affinity for horses, and are 
most useful companions on travels to uncharted regions. 

DRUID: The Druids are fierce fighters, especially when 
defending their beloved groves. They hold all trees to be 
sacred and their town of Yew lies deep in the woods. Druids 
are also impressive practitioners of the mystic arts and their 
knowledge of herbs is without peer. They may fight with 
different types of bows, although their preferred weapon is the 
mace. They Druidic philosophy forbids the wearing of metal 
of any kind, so Leather is their armour of choice. The Druid's 
knowledge of the ways of the woodlands make them 
invaluable as fellow travelers.

TINKER: The Tinkers of Minoc are both highly skilled 
artisans and superb fighters. They are generally suspicious of 
magic, believing that only hand-crafted artifacts posses true 
value, and thus use it seldomly. A Tinker may use any 
weapon, however, the double-bladed war axe is preferred. 
Tinkers will use any non-magical armour. A traveling party 
with a Tinker aboard need never fear for repair of any metal 
or wooden items.

PALADIN: These great fighters live in the town of Trinsic in 
the southern part of Britannia. They are expert in all forms of 
combat and weapon use, and are one of the few professions 
that will make use of magically chain armour when it is 
available. Their deep beliefs in the value of good lend 
strength to their magic, which they wield with a certain flair. 
Paladins are thus very formidable opponents and highly 
valued allies.

RANGER: Off the western shore of the mainland lies the fair 
island of the Rangers. Venturing far from their retreat at 
Skara Brae, they strive to improve the conditions of people 
throughout the realm. Rangers are well-versed in woods lore 
and fight fiercely with most weapons, but shun all but leather 
armour. They are also proficient magic users and faultless 
trackers in any wilderness.

SHEPHERD: It is uncertain whether the Shepherds are 
skilled in any form of warfare or in the mystic arts. However, 
they are highly valued traveling companions for their 
humility and their knowledge of the ways of the land.

A traveler in Britannia need not journey alone. In each town 
one may - indeed one ought to - converse with all the 
inhabitants. If thy personal philosophy of life is close to that 
of the town, then though may ask one of the residents to join 
thy party. If amenable to your invitation, this person will 
travel with thee, aid thee, and fight with thee. He or she will 
stay loyal to thee only as long as thou stay true to thy beliefs. 
If at any time, through actions or deeds, thou stray from the 
Path, then thy companions will desert thee to thy Fate. 
Remember, these are Free Companions - not servants or 
mercenaries. Such is their faith in thee as their leader, that all 
gold and supplies held by the party is given into thy care for 
the good of all. Use this trust wisely.


CHAPTER IV

MERCENTILE
There is a thriving merchant class in Britannia. Each town 
and village has its own shops that specialize in local wares 
and services. The seasoned traveler will discover many 
delightful and useful items to purchase, as well as a wide 
variety of places to eat and sleep.
The monetary system of Britannia is based on Lord 
British's heraldic charge. It is a gold coin with a silver serpent 
cast vermeil upon the gold. The process is so difficult that the 
coin has never been successfully counterfeited or debased in 
value. This coin has been the foundation of the realm's 
stability and is universally accepted by merchants. Coins of 
the realm are also to be found in the chests that appear from 
time to time and are found below the surface in the dank 
dungeons. Beware, as most chests have diabolical traps in 
place to confound thieves.
Here is a partial list of some of the more popular shops and 
their wares:

WEAPONS SHOP: Here on may purchase the finest in 
weaponry that blacksmiths can forge. Depending on the skills 
of the local artisans, a shop might offer the following range of 
weapons:


Staff
Dagger
Sling
Mace
Axe



Sword
Bow
Crossbow
Flaming Oil
Halbred


The weapons shops also offer liberal trade-ins on used 
equipment, although if thy axe is greatly notched 
from battle, do not expect much for it.


ARMOURY: Fine Armour may be purchased in the armories 
of Britannia. 'Tis just the item to keep 
highwaymen from slipping a dirk into thy ribs! The local 
armory may offer any of the following selection:

Cloth
Leather
Chain
Plate

The armories will likewise offer trade-ins on used armour, 
although most would not consider them liberal. 
By the time most fighters get around to seeking improved 
armour, the old armour is almost completely 
falling apart, and its principal value is as scrap for the 
foundries.

PUB: The subjects of Lord British truly prize their pubs, and 
it shows in the gracious hospitality to be 
found in all public houses. Most offer an excellent array of 
drinks and food for the wayfarer. It is also 
commonly known that the bartenders are incurable gossips - 
if asked the right question and offered the 
right price - rare news may be obtained. Public drunkenness 
is prohibited throughout the lands of 
Britannia, so temper thy indulgence with wisdom.

GROCERY: Little is worse than being far from a town and 
finding thyself and one's companions 
starving to death because the person in charge of the 
expedition (thou) hast forgotten to buy enough food. 
Be sure to lay in a plentiful supply at each opportunity. Thy 
fellow travelers will most certainly be 
appreciative of thy foresight.


THE HEALER: Some towns contain these invaluable places 
of air where on may go to be healed when 
suffering from grievous wounds. Remember to heal thy 
companions also, for a healthy party ensures 
survival in the wild regions. The Healers are the only ones 
who may cure victims of the noxious venom 
inflicted by the inhuman denizens of the land.

INN: The numerous inns of Britannia provide the tired 
travelers with a comfortable night's sleep, which 
refreshes and revitalizes each character. The character of the 
inns throughout Britannia varies, as does the 
price.

HERB SHOP: All practitioners of the mystic arts will search 
far and wide to locate these rare shops. 
Within them is to be found the components - or reagents, as 
they are known to enchanters - for spell 
mixtures. Without these mixtures, no spell may be cast 
successfully. Due to the rareness of some of the 
herbs, many are not offered for sale regularly, if at all. The 
known magical reagents art:


Sulphurous Ash
Ginseng
Garlic
Spider Silk


Blood Moss
Black Pearl
Nightshade
Mandrake Roo


Care should be taken to mix the herbs in the correct 
proportions, so as not to waste the valuable 
ingredients.

GUILD SHOP: The Thieves' Guild has been essentially 
driven out of Britannia, but rumors persist of its 
existence somewhere in the ocean, perhaps on one of the 
uncharted islands. Somehow the Guild maintains 
contact with the mainland, perhaps through the brazen 
pirates. The goods once offered by the Guild were 
quite expensive, but invaluable to the traveler who sought to 
stray off the beaten path in search of novel 
experiences.

These are the main shops of Britannia. A few other places 
exist that are worth of note:

SHRINES: Here the devout of each town may meditate upon 
their Path in life. Each shrine responds to 
the meditation of a different Mantra (chant). Consistency and 
concentration are the keys to meditation. 
Enlightenment is attained only through care.

THE SEER HAWKWIND: Residing within Lord British's 
castle is the Royal Seer, Hawkwind. Many 
aspire to tread the Path, but very few find their way. Seek the 
advice of the Seer as to thy progress upon 
the Path. He can look into thy heart's heart and read thy 
progress or failure. Heed his advice, for feet that 
have strayed may be brought back upon the Path.


CHAPTER V

TRANSPORTATION
Throughout the centuries most travel has been accomplished 
by the use of the feet. While this method 
lends itself to scenic hikes, it is a  terribly slow way to journey 
from one end of a huge continent to the 
other. Getting around Britannia, which may never be without 
risk, could soon become easier. Under the 
auspices of Lord British, studies of the properties of the Moon 
gates are beginning to yield a clearer 
understanding of the Gates' mystical workings. People 
forecast that future citizens will use these gates as a 
normal means of distant travel. The destinations of the gates 
appear to be rigidly bound to the phases of 
the twin moons Trammel and Felucca. The appearance and 
disappearance of the gates are represented on 
most maps of  the realm as phases of the moons. The gate 
active is indicated by the phase of the moon 
Trammel. Once a gate is entered, thy destination is indicated 
by the phase of the moon Felucca.

Britannia is marked by six terrain types, each with their own 
features:

GRASS: The smoothest and easiest to travel on, the lush 
grass of Britannia serves to fatten its herds. One 
may be pass here with any impediment.

BRUSH: Low scrub growth and bushes will hinder thy 
progress, permitting thy party to move but at three 
quarters if thy normal speed. Fine tinder for campfires may be 
found at the base of larger scrubs. 

FOREST: The going is slow through dense woods, with thy 
speed cut fully in half. The oak so dearly 
loved by the Druids predominates here, along with healthy 
growths of Ash and Beech. There is quite a 
lack of visibility in the forest regions. 

HILLS: Hilly terrain, much favored by those who raise sheep, 
will slow thee down considerable, so much 
so that none but the sure-footed mountain goat can move at 
more than a snail's pace.

MARSH: The marshes and fens are particularly treacherous 
and should be avoided at all costs. While 
progress is only slowed to half one's normal pace by the muck 
underfoot, the marshes give off poisonous 
gases which can severely harm members of the party.

MOUNTAINS: Mountaineering is not a well-known skill in 
Britannia, so the mountains are closed to the 
normal traveler. There is also a lack of visibility over the 
mountains.

Horse may be obtained and greatly speed travel on land. The 
sages of the Lycaeum are reputed to have 
been working on a lighter-than-air device for Lord British, 
but it was stolen some months ago and its 
whereabouts is not known.
Since while traveling, thy party members' hit points may be 
diminished by unexpected  
confrontations, every so often thou should Hole up for the 
night and camp. If thy rest is not interrupted by 
wandering  creatures, then thy party will be greatly refreshed.

At sea, masterful control of thy ship is necessary for survival. 
Ships have powerful cannons, but they can 
only fire broadside. To learn seamanship, thou must 
understand the ways of the water and the wind.
The ocean is made up of three types of water: Large waves 
mark deep water; small waves 
indicate shallow water; tight ripples show where lie shoals, 
too shallow for ships to pass over. Remember 
that a change in wave size signals approaching land. This 
will aid in thy navigation.
The winds of Britannia blow very constant in a given 
direction, then shift to a new direction for 
another long period. This fact allows the skipper of a ship to 
sail strategically. If the ship is facing into the 
direction of the wind, (suck as sailing East against an East 
wind) then the ship's progress is at its slowest - 
1/4 Speed. If the ship is sailing with the wind, (as in sailing 
West with and East wind behind thee) then 
the ship's speed is faster - 3/4 speed. It is only when one tacks 
across the wind that the ship reaches 
maximum speed, (such as sailing North or South against an 
East wind) - Full Speed. 
Strive to maneuver thy ship so as to bring either the port or 
starboard batteries to bear before 
creatures or pirates can close and try to board. Thy ship has 
armour which, if reduced to zero, will cause it 
to sink and thy party shall perish. A captured pirate ship can 
be used in place of a badly damaged ship. 
Practice near shore until thou develop seafaring legs. The 
ship's cannons also serve for firing upon land 
bound creatures. Beware, some of the land creatures have the 
power of flight and can pursue thee over the 
waves!


CHAPTER VI

WEAPONS AND ARMOUR OF THE REALM

WEAPONRY:
HANDS: If thou lose all of thy weapons, this is what thou 
hast left. Although it is possible to kill some of 
the lesser monsters with thy bare hands, the odds of success 
truly are not very high.

STAFF: A six foot piece of carved ironwood that has been 
magically attuned, the staff sold in the 
weapons shop of Britain is more formidable than it seems. It 
is the favorite weapon of Magi.

DAGGER: Ten inches of beautifully worked steel make the 
standard Britannian dagger. The traditional 
basket hilt looks very functional. A favorite weapon of 
novices.

SLING: The common sling is fashioned from twenty-four 
inches of cloth, folded in half, with a leather 
cup. The projectiles - small rocks - are easily collected, 
making this an inexpensive missile weapon. A 
perennial favorite with travelers down on their luck.

MACE: Upon the 1 1/2 inch thick oaken stem of the 
Britannian mace rests a globe of iron studded with 
knobs. The impact of this weapon has been known to shatter 
the skulls of enemies outright. A favorite 
among the Druids.

AXE: With a double-sided two foot blade, a warrior wielding 
a battle axe can really wage war. The axe is 
a favorite among Tinkers, as many of them are workers of 
wood and metal.

SWORD: Ah, a true fighter's weapon. Four feet of wicked, 
blue steel will  strike fear into the heart of any 
opponent. The sword is an automatic favorite among 
Fighters.

BOW: A truly competent long-range weapon. Get thy 
enemies before they can get thee! The Britannian 
bows are made from the finest yew wood. Each longbow is 
hand-rubbed and ornamented with horn nocks 
on the tips. A favorite among those with poor armour.

CROSSBOW: Now here is a real missile weapon. The impact 
of the crossbow will stop a rampaging 
troll. The crossbow is traditionally made of mahogany with 
carved maple veneer on the sides depicting 
Lord British's device, the Silver Serpent. A favorite among 
Bards for the singing of the crossbow's string.

FLAME OIL: The use of flasks of Flame Oil constitutes an 
innovation in Britannia. Any of the Eight 
Great Professions can use it. The wielder casts the ignited oil 
in a chosen direction, creating a corridor of 
flaming oil which lasts several minutes. Any enemy entering 
the field of flaming oil suffers burn damage 
for each turn passed in the inferno. A favorite weapon among 
those badly hurt and in need of rescue - a 
last ditch defense.

HALBERD: Seven feet of stout wood topped with a blade of 
deadly steel. The halberd requires excellent 
coordination to be used effectively. It is the most deadly of 
weapons in the hands of an expert, who uses it 
to strike over the heads of his fellows. A favorite among 
Paladins.

Several magical weapons are said to be found hither and yon, 
but the location of these are not known for 
certain. It is said that perchance a traveler must be worthy of 
such a weapon before it will become 
available.

ARMOUR:
SKIN: What thou are left wearing when though hast no 
armour at all.

CLOTH: Peasant's garb for those who can afford nothing 
better, or those restricted by the vows of their 
profession from wearing aught else. A reluctant favorite 
among the Magi.

LEATHER: The workhorse of novice travelers, Leather 
armour is found throughout Britannia. Many of 
the professions are restricted to Leather as their best choice. A 
favorite among Bards, Druids, and 
Rangers. 

CHAIN: Use by those who can handle the weight of chain 
main while fighting, this armour offers 
excellent protection. Only the finest steel is used, with double 
thickness on the shoulders. All links are 
individually riveted for strength, A favorite among Fighters 
and Tinkers

PLATE: The aristocrat of the armourer's craft, Plate affords 
more protection than any other conventional 
armour. Each suit is tailor made to thy shape. The cost is 
naturally sizable, but the effect is inspiring. A 
favorite among Paladins.

As is the case with weaponry, rumors abound of magical 
armour that will withstand the breath of a 
dragon. But, who knows? Perhaps these are but rumors 
spread by Orcs to lure fighters into illusionary 
searches resulting in death.


CHAPTER VII

MAGICAL ARTS
Most of us understand only those things that we can see and 
feel. Yet there is a segment of the population 
that can see the unseeable, and can feel that which has no 
substance. The perception and use of these 
ethereal forces is called magic. To some it is an Art, to others 
a Science. It is difficult for this Historian to 
describe the Art with which he is totally unfamiliar. He can, 
however, commend upon what purports to be 
the Science. 
The basis of all spellcasting is the proper mixing of the 
necessary reagents. Reagents are the 
physical materials which are said to provide the initial energy 
to begin the spell. Each spell uses a 
different reagent formula. These formulas are jealously 
guarded by magic users, for quite often the 
difference between life and death is knowing a spell that thy 
opponent knows not. From the Bill of Fare at 
the Herb Shops, the observer can glean the names of the 
reagents: Sulphurous Ash; Ginseng; Garlic; 
Spider Silk; Blood Moss; and Black Pearl.
Furthermore, there are reputed to be two others, more 
powerful still than those just listed. 
However, they are not for sale according to the proprietors of 
the Herb Shops. They are: Nightshade and 
Mandrake root.
Only certain classes of the eight major professions have any 
talent for magic. Some are quite 
strongly endowed, such as Magi or Druids, while the 
Paladins, Bards, Tinkers, and Rangers have but a 
little power. Fighters and Shepherds have no magical ability 
at all. In face, Magi are so tuned to the 
special energy that comprises magic that when they cast a 
spell, a blue aura glows around their head and 
shoulders.
While most spells are reputed to possess either offensive or 
defensive abilities, some are 
utilitarian in nature, such as Light, Open, and View spells. 
The rare aeromancer can harness the power of 
the winds. An ancient scroll on display in the Library at the 
Lycaeum tells of different types of energy 
fields created by means magical. It lists the following fields 
and discusses their properties:

SLEEP: A green field that may bring sleep to anyone who 
passes through it.

LIGHTNING: A blue field that serves as an impenetrable 
barrier which inflicts damage upon any who 
touch it.

FLAME: An orange field that imparts massive damage upon 
those foolish enough to try to cross it.

POISON: A violet field of noxious vapors that poisons anyone 
passing through who is not quick to hold 
their breath.

Whether these fields may be controlled by magic is uncertain. 
However, the scroll was concerned with the 
tale of a Wizard's battle! One can only ponder whether the 
writer survived the encounter.

CHAPTER VIII

A BESTIARY
BAT: A non-evil subterranean dweller found in the deepest 
caverns, the principal diet of the Bat is 
animal blood. They are quite large and may attack any who 
disturb their rest.

CYCLOPS: These evil giants can hurl half-ton boulders down 
from the heights. Even a grazing hit will 
do considerable damage to a member of thy party. The 
Serpent's Spine is said to be the best hunting 
range for them.

DRAGON: The Dragon is an evil, flying serpent which can 
cross water and blast ships with huge 
fireballs. Not many ships can withstand a couple of passes by 
an attacking Dragon.

ETTIN: These evil two-headed aberrations of nature can cast 
huge boulders down upon thy party, causing 
immense damage. It is best to try to kill them with long-range 
weapons and spells. A large of clan of 
Ettins is said to live along the Serpent's Spine.

GAZER: These hypnotic creatures snare their prey by putting 
them to sleep. The deep forests are the 
favorite habitat of these evil, floating eyes.

GHOST: The restless spirits of those trapped between planes, 
Ghosts can pass through walls, so use 
extreme caution when they are though to be nearby. Evil 
Ghosts are often found in ruins, battlefields, 
and crypts.

GREMLIN: These hungry denizens of the underworld love to 
sneak up to unwary travelers and steal all 
their food. Do not let an evil Gremlin get next to thee!

HEADLESS: Another evil being best suited to terror and 
destruction, the Headless is indeed a creature of 
nightmares. Many a traveler has fled in abject horror at the 
sign of these headless torsos bearing 
down upon them.

HYDRA: Beware the evil breath of the multi-headed Hydra! 
The massive fireballs can fry most members 
of thy party.

INSECTS: If thou dost stay clear of these non-evil vermin, 
they will not bother thee. Marsh and dungeons 
are their favorite locals. Insects can fly, so they can chase thee 
over water.

LICH: This undead shade of a powerful wizard can still case 
very powerful magic spells. The Lich is a 
most dangerous opponent under even favorable conditions.

LAVA LIZARD: These reptilian creatures love fire and dwell 
in infernos. In combat they have been 
known to spit flaming lava thirty feet, so between these evil 
beasts.

MIMIC: One of the most treacherous and evil creatures in all 
of Britannia, the Mimic can assume any 
shape, although they seem to prefer assuming the likeness of 
treasure chests. Upon spotting one, the 
careless traveler greedily rushes towards the chest. When the 
traveler gets close enough, Mimic casts 
out a poisonous venom. When the traveler succumbs to the 
poison, the Mimic feasts upon him. The 
only known way to detect a chest Mimic is to wait until it gets 
curious enough to peer out at thee by 
lifting the lid of the chest.

NIXIE: These aquatic first cousins of the ancient race of 
Elves rise from the depths to strike terror into 
the hearts of seafarers. The evil Nixies wield sharp tridents 
which can be hurled against a ship's crew 
from afar, causing great damage.

ORC: Would that every Orc had been destroyed with the fall 
of the Triad of Evil! They bred like rabbits 
and still infest the woods and hills, though in much smaller 
numbers than before. 

PHANTOM: These tragic souls have been captured by evil 
and forces to reenact their battles throughout 
all time. They are bodiless, but can be detected because their 
swords and shields remain visible. 
Phantoms are tough opponents as dying is meaningless to 
them.

PIRATES: Truly the dregs of Britannia, most of these crews 
have death warrants hanging over their 
heads. Remember that the evil Pirates take no prisoners! 
Their ships are equipped with heavy cannon, 
and the crews are well-trained to quickly move their large 
galleons into battle position. It is a rare 
skipper indeed that can survive a broadside duel with a Pirate 
vessel. Thy best hope is to "dot the T", 
or to close with thy enemy. If thou art able to defeat the crew, 
the ship itself becomes thy prize. For 
castaways on remote islands, this is the only hope for 
salvation.

PYTHON: The venom of Britannian Python is highly 
poisonous. These non-evil constrictors can spit 
their foul venom a full eleven paces, and should be treated 
with the utmost respect.

RAT: The common Giant Rat, while not evil by nature, will 
still enter human camps in search of food. 
They pose a threat to any dungeon explorers foolish enough 
to startle them.

REAPER: These grim creatures stand upright on trunk-like 
bodies and wave many tentacles at their prey. 
The evil Reaper can also reputedly cast different energy 
fields, and thus is considered a most vicious 
opponent.

ROGUE: The Rogues that are to be found throughout the land 
are often escaped prisoners who now make 
their livelihood as highwaymen by attacking travelers. If they 
get next to thee, they may pick thy 
pockets.

SEAHORSE: These magical creatures appear quite fair and 
are not evil, but if offended they make 
devastating enemies. They are possessed of powerful magical 
abilities which can wreak havoc among 
thy party.

SERPENT: The Sea Serpent is an aquatic relative of the 
Dragon. The fireball cast by the Serpent can 
sink a ship long before it has a chance to close with the beast. 
The best defense against a Sea Serpent 
is to engage it in close combat as quickly as possible. It is thy 
only chance, albeit as slim one, to 
survive the encounter.

SKELETON: Animated bones, the Skeletons are the undead 
incarnations of a variety of creatures. These 
tools of evil strike fear into ordinary travelers. With the 
proper enchantment, however, they can be 
Dispelled. 

SLIME: Dungeon walls fairly ooze with slime. Most slime 
just sits there, this evil variety comes after 
thee!

SPIDER: Beware of inadvertently wrecking a spider's web 
and this non-evil creature will probably leave 
thee in peace. If thou suffer the misfortune of crossing one, 
take care to avoid the venomous spittle.

SQUID: When the tentacles of the Giant Squid close around a 
man or a ship, the very power of lightning 
is released upon the prey. 'Tis best to try to destroy the evil 
Squid with cannon fire before it can 
engage thee at close quarters. 

TROLL: These large and evil creatures can hurl axes - of 
which they carry a plentiful supply - with 
frightening accuracy. Beware their tricks. Trolls are usually 
found in hills and mountains.

WISP: More insubstantial than most evil creatures, Wisps can 
actually teleport around the battlefield and 
attack from anywhere. It is most disconcerting to be involved 
in an encounter than contains a Wisp.

WIZARD: Not all magic users follow the path of Good. These 
evil renegade Wizards make very 
dangerous adversaries when crossed.

ZORN: Zorns are the antithesis of everything. They pass right 
through walls and obstacles, and negate all 
nearby magic. If an evil Zorn closes with thee, thou probably 
will not escape its embrace.


LORDS OF THE EVIL DOMINION
BALRON: It is believed by some that all of these Marshals of 
Evil were destroyed when the Triad fell. If 
any do exist, it would be better for one to Quit life itself than 
to face the fury of a Balron. The ancient 
scrolls describe them as flying creatures which cast 
devastating fireballs as well as weave massive 
enchantments that once felled entire armies.

DEVIL: These Flying Lieutenants of Evil may sweep offshore 
and chase thee across the waves. They are 
powerful magic users and should be avoided at all costs. 
Devils are particularly fond of torturing their 
victims when the opportunity arises. 


CHAPTER IX

THE SKILLS OF COMBAT
The historian is a man of intellectual pursuits and therefore 
little acquainted with the ways of combat. For 
the following information on such skills, we are deeply 
indebted to the Master at Arms of the Order of the  
Silver Serpent.

BEFORE FIGHTING: Be certain that thou art properly 
equipped for the ensuing fray. Dost thou has the 
proper weapon and armour? If not, then thou must equip 
thyself anew. When thou commence to Ready a 
weapon or Wear some armour, thou wilt be offered a selection 
of such items as are available in thy party's 
common pool. If thou dost choose an item inappropriate for 
thy class, thou wilt be asked to select again.

INITIATING COMBAT: When thou art next to an enemy, 
thou may Attack in the direction of thy foe. 
Thou wilt then be able to view thy combat location, and battle 
shall ensue.

BEING ATTACKED: If thou dost not attack a creature, then 
assuredly the creature will attack thee at its 
earliest opportunity, assuming that they creature is evil or 
hungry.

HOW TO FIGHT: Each fighter and magic used will have an 
opportunity for separate action. Thou may 
only attack in the main cardinal directions (North, East, 
South, and West). When it is a fighter's turn, 
those with hand weapons may Attack an adjacent area by 
specifying the direction. Those with missile 
weapons may fire them across the battlefield by denoting the 
direction of fire. Magic users can Cast a spell 
when it is their turn. Again, only spells for which reagents 
have been prepared will function. The spell 
must be selected and the direction fixed. Most combat spells 
are functional cross the field of battle. Energy 
fields, however, can be cast only in areas adjacent to the 
caster.

VICTORY: When all of the monsters have been destroyed, 
thou wilt return to the surrounding 
countryside. If the monsters were carrying any treasure, this 
will now be available to thee. Care should be 
used in  Opening any treasure chests, as they are frequently 
trapped.

FLEEING: There will come times in thy quests when though 
wilt be confronted with superior forces. 
Whenever one of thy team is near death, guide him or her off 
the combat field to save them. If the tactical 
situation deteriorates completely, removing all members of 
the party from the field will disengage thee 
from thy enemy. There are those who will call thy actions 
cowardly, but a wise leader will know the value 
of preserving the life of one's fellows.

TERRAIN CONSIDERATIONS: Devote considerable time to 
the study of the fields of combat. Locate 
defensible positions for thy party, making sure to maintain an 
avenue of escape should the battle go badly. 
Remember our heritage! A few valiant fighters strategically 
placed in a narrow rocky pass can stand off an 
army numbered in the thousands.

WEAPON CONSIDERATIONS: These are three distinct 
classes of weapons available to the warrior. 
They are: Missile Weapons which permit the striking of foes 
at a distance; Polearms which allow one to 
smite over an obstacle or companion; and hand to hand 
weapons which necessitate engaging one's 
enemies at very close quarters.

ETHICS OF WAR: Do not feel that it is thy birthright to slay 
everything that walks, flies, or swims. The 
Code of Chivalry states that before engaging in combat with a 
foe, the warrior should ask, "Is this foe 
truly evil?" If it is not, then thou must not kill it, but stand thy 
ground and force it to retreat. The Code is 
thy touchstone, for without it thou are but a speck of dust in 
the whirlwind of Chaos.


CHAPTER X

MODERN CIVILIZATION AND OUR UNIVERSE
We have just emerged from the darkest period in recorded 
history. With the vanquishing of the Triad of 
Evil. We need no longer anxiously watch our backs for fear 
that evil will fall upon us in the first  
unguarded moment. The stability achieved by the New Age 
seems to herald a Golden Age of Peace and 
Prosperity.
What kind of people will inherit this New Age? Surely our 
destiny is not to perpetually fight as 
warring tribes throughout all time. Is there not a higher 
calling - one worthy of our efforts and 
capabilities?
If one accepts that the next area of human growth should not 
be fostered through aggressive 
territorial expansion, then a possible answer emerges - We 
must turn inward. Of late a small group of 
inquisitive philosophers at the Lycaeum have been asking 
such questions of each other. While their 
musings seem quite radical and new, they are worthy of 
consideration:
Is living a life of virtue an essential element of civilization, or 
can society survive the test of time 
without such principles?
How might we ensure the long-term continuation of our new-
found peace? What systems of laws 
and ethics will ensure the continued happiness of all our 
people?
Why doth Evil still stalk the world and can it ever be truly 
vanquished?
If the public set of ethics which evolved from the days of 
primordial survival is impure, how can we 
achieve a clean foundation upon which to build a life of 
virtue?
Given the premise that to understand purity, one must strive 
to be so, how does one strive for that 
which cannot be understood?
If our true purpose here is to achieve a balance with out 
surroundings - as is suggested in the 
ancient scrolls of the Library - how can We face Nature 
without first facing ourselves?
Meditation seems to hold the key to perspective. In the 
transcendental state one is freed from the 
shackles of modern living. The whole of the  universe 
resonates with thee, and thou dost feel for once as if 
thou dost belong to a greater whole. Yet all too soon the 
meditation ends, and thou dost return from this 
brief glimpse of the sublime to the daily need for survival.
It is time for all to put aside their warlike ways and begin 
fighting the evil that lurks within themselves. It 
is far too easy to sit and espouse the path of Virtue, yet never 
set foot upon it. They ancient rule of treating 
others as thou wouldst be treated thyself takes on new 
meaning when put into the context of universal 
harmony. We must become living examples of our beliefs!
How does one begin to first walk along this new way? Do 
road markers exist if we but open our 
eyes to see them?
To be at peace in all areas is a state only achieved by an 
Avatar. Is such a state attainable by any 
human, fallible as we all are? The true answer can only be 
found by those who quest forth in search of it - 
for who can see the end of the Path before beginning the 
journey? Yet it is also written that for each 
person the Path is different. Perhaps the seeker of wisdom 
and enlightenment should begin by visiting 
Lord British, for his knowledge of the ways of the land is 
great. Conversing with him may help one to 
determine where lies the centers of the Eight Virtues of the 
Avatar.
Many philosophers hold the opinion that the Path is in reality 
but a series of separate small paths. 
Each minor path leads to the fulfillment of an aspect of 
ourselves. Treading one of these minor paths may 
be construed as a life's goal, and many people have debated 
which is the most advantageous to follow.
Yet is not the whole much greater than the sum of its parts? 
Take up the challenge and tread not 
one but all of the minor paths in thy search for enlightenment 
and perfection. Perhaps only then will 
though find the beginnings of the great Path. The Quest of the 
Avatar awaits. It is not thy Heritage that 
thou does seek, 'tis thy Destiny!

Afterword
As an addendum to this work, I, Lord British, would like to 
speak of the Quest of the Avatar mentioned in 
these pages.
The Quest of the Avatar is the search for a new standard, a 
new vision of life for which out 
people may strive. We seek the person who can become a 
shining example of our nation and guides us 
from the Age of  Darkness into the Age of Light.
We have sent this message our to the farthest reaches of the 
known universe, indeed, we have 
even spoken across the void of time. Is there One who can 
complete the Quest of the Avatar? Many have 
tried already, and have met with partial success, becoming 
enlightened in one or more of the Eight 
Virtues of the Avatar - but none have yet attained the true 
state of being  an Avatar.
The secrets of the Avatar are buried deep in the hearts of both 
our people and the land in which 
we dwell. The search will be arduous and the One who shall 
succeed must be able to assemble all the parts 
of the great mystery in order to solve the Quest.
Gaze upon the device portrayed on the facing page of this 
tome. Learn it well, for when thou dost 
gaze upon it again then shall thy life's quest be revealed.



                                Ultima IV
                           Quest of the Avatar

                          PLAYER REFERENCE CARD

                             By Lord British
                                
PLAYER REFERENCE

A)	Attack - Attempt to engage thy foe with the weapon 
        thou hast readied (Ready Weapon command); must be
        followed by the direction of thy foe.
B)	Board - Board a vessel or mount a horse.
C)      Cast - Cast a magical spell; must be followed by the number
        of the player who wishes to cast it (not needed in combat or
        in dungeon rooms), and then the first letter of the desired
        spell.  Note: All spells must have reagents mixed in advance
        of casting.
D)      Descend - Climb down ladder to next level of dungeon or building.
E)	Enter - Go into such places as villages, townes, 
        castles, dungeons and shrines.
F)      Fire - Fire a ship's cannons (once thou hast Boarded); must
        be followed by a direction.  Note: Broadsides only!
G)	Get Chest - Attempt to open (and disarm, if trapped) 
        chest; must be followed by the number of the player who
        wishes to open the chest, except during combat and in dungeon rooms.  
        Note: 'Tis wisest to use the player with the highest Dexterity when
        examining potentially dangerous chests as this lessens the chances
        of setting off any traps.
H)	Hole up and camp - Set up camp to rest and recover 
        from thy wounds. Note: This command may only be used successfully
        with limited frequency.
1)      Ignite a torch - Light a torch for illumination in dungeons. Requires
        a special item.
J)      Jimmy lock - Use a magical key to unlock a sealed door. Must be
        followed by the direction of the door that thou dost wish to unlock.
K)      Klimb - Climb up a ladder to the next level of a building or dungeon,
        or to reach the surface from the topmost level of a dungeon.
L)	Locate Position - Requires a special item.
M)	Mix Reagents - Prepare material components of spells for later use.
        Note: Thou must have reagents mixed ahead of time in order 
        to cast any spells.  When asked "Reagent:". type the letter
        corresponding to the reagents desired and then type [Return] when 
        thou wishes to mix them.
N)      New order - Exchanges the position of two players 
        indicated within thy party, except for player 
        #l, for thou must lead the party. 
O)	Open door - Open a door in the direction indicated.
P)	Peer at gem - Requires a special item.
Q)	Quit & Save - Saves the current game status to disk; 
        thou may continue after this command or power down thy computer.
R)	Ready a weapon - Equip a player with the weapon of 
        thy choice (if owned) for use in combat.
S)      Search - Search thy exact current location for unusual items.
T)	Talk - Allows a player to converse with merchants or 
        townesfolk in the direction indicated. 
U)	Use - Use an item thou hast found during play by 
        means of the "Search" command.
V)	Volume - Toggles sound effects on or off.
W)	Wear armour - Outfits a player with the armour of 
        thy choice if owned for defense in combat.
X)	Xit - That's (e)xit thy current form of transportation 
        and continue on foot.
Y)	Yell - Yell "giddyup" or "whoa" to speed up or slow 
        down thy horse.
Z)	Ztats - Displays the status and attributes of a selected 
        player; if 0 is pressed instead of a player 
        number, this command will display the lists of weapons, 
        armour, items, reagents and mixtures.  
        The left and right arrow keys will scroll through these lists, 
        while pressing any other key will 
        return thee to game play.
ARROW KEYS  Control movement. North/South/East/West

* Special Note: Talking with the people found in the game is 
one of the most important features of Ultima 
IV to master. It is almost impossible to solve thy quests 
without talking to virtually all people in each 
towne. Each person with whom thou dost Talk is capable of a 
full conversation. They can be asked about 
their "Name", "Job", and "Health". Thou may "Look" again at 
their visual description. From this 
information thou shouldst be able to discern what else they 
might know, hinted at directly by use of the 
precise words in the conversation. For example: If thou were 
to ask Dupre about his "Job" and he were to 
respond "I am hunting Gremlins," thou might think to ask 
him about "Hunting" or "Gremlins" - about 
either of which he might offer some insight. 
Each of these people might ask of thee a question as well; be 
sure to answer the question 
honestly, for dishonesty will be remembered and not reflect 
well on thee for the rest of the game. Often 
thou shalt not know what to ask a townesperson until thou 
hast been told by another: e.g. Iolo the bard 
might tell thee to ask Shamino the Ranger about swords. 
Even if thou hadst met Shamino earlier thou 
wouldst not have known to ask about swords, and thus thou 
wouldst have to seek him out again if thou 
dost wish that knowledge.
Some of the people that thou shalt meet may be willing to 
become thy travelling companions. If 
thou dost wish for a character to become a player in thy party, 
thou must ask them to "Join" thee. 'Tis 
most wise to strengthen thy party as rapidly as possible, up to 
the seven companions thou shall need to 
complete the game. When thou art through with a 
conversation, then speak the word "Bye" as an accepted 
means of politely ending thy conversation.
Be sure to keep a journal of thy travels! Many of the clues to 
solving the quests of Ultima IV art 
contained in the various and diverse conversations thou might 
have with the various townesfolk. It would 
be next to impossible to solve this game without some means 
of referring back to prior conversations held 
during play.
Be sure to thoroughly explore the cities and townes! Many of 
the quests within Ultima IV art 
contained entirely within individual cities. 'Tis wisest to 
spend a great deal of fime seeking out the 
answers that lie hidden in each one of the various townes of 
Britannia, before moving on to another. 
NOTE: During thy conversations with people in Ultima IV, 
thou may feel the impulse to show thy 
generosity to less fortunate fellows. Thou may do so by 
saying: "Give".

Thy party is seen here standing on a point of land that jut: 
into the sea. To the North is a castle, while a 
ship rocks gently on the waves to the Northwest. Just above 
the ship one can see a towne. Thy party 
consists of three travellers - British, Iolo and Geoffrey - 
whose names appear in the Party Window. Their 
current status is also therein displayed: British hath 372 Hit 
Points and is in Good condition; Iolo hath 
380 Hit Points and is suffering from Poison; and Geoffrey 
hath 380 Hit Points and is in Good condition. 
The narrow window below 'indicates that the party hath 24 
units of Food and 1823 Gold pieces. The 
symbol in the center indicates if any spells art currently 
active.

Paused to cross a bridge, thy party can see an approaching 
band of Skeletons to the Northeast.  At the top 
of the view window thou can see the current status of the twin 
moons Trammel and Felucca, which is 
Crescent Waning for Trammel and Felucca is in its Last 
Quarter.  The moonphases art represented as 
follows:

Thou art currently checking on the status of the traveller lolo 
and his attributes show in the Party 
Window.  Thou can see that he is a Male Bard whose 
condition is Good, he is possessed of 13 Magic 
Point, 16 Strength, 19 Dexterity, 13 Intelligence; he hath 
attained Level 4; cuffently hath 376 Hit Points, 
with a flit Point Maximum of 400, and hath 714 Experience 
Points.  His current weapon is a Sling, while 
he wears Cloth Armour.

Thy party can be seen at the bottom part of the view window, 
engaged in mortal combat with four Pirates 
who art aboard their ship.  Note that as each member of thy 
party bath the opportunity to strike a blow, 
their current weapon is displayed below their name. The 
direction of the wind is indicated at the bottom of 
the view window.  If thou were to win this combat and take 
possession of the vessel, the full Strength of 
the ship would be displayed in the narrow window where thy 
gold would normally be displayed.

Magical ability is directly related to the Profession and 
Intelligence of thyself and thy travelling 
companions.  Magical strength is twice the Intelligence of the 
spellcaster, with potential modified by 
Profession.  The enchantment potential of the various 
Professions is :

Mage - Full				Bard - One Half
Ranger - On Half			Fighter - None
Druid - Three Fourths                   Paladin - One Half
Tinker: One Fourth			Shepherd - None


ULTIMA IV HINTS

LOCATION OF RUNES
Honesty - Northwest corner of Moonglow. Search the chest 
next to Mariah.
Compassion - Northeast corner of Britain (the Inn). Search at 
the end of the hallway.
Valor - Southeast edge of Town. The rune is in one of four 
towers which connect long hallways 
surrounding the town.
Justice - Northwest corner of Yew, enter the jailhouse and 
speak with Talfourd. Search the felon's cell.
Sacrifice - Once in the Weapons shop in Minoc, you must 
enter a small room off to the Southeast of it. In 
the lower right hand corner of this room is a fire pit. Search 
the southeast corner of the firepit.
Honor - In the southwest corner of Trinsic, Virgil is 
surrounded by a wall of force fields. Search the space 
just to the upper-right of Virgil.
Spirituality - Located in a small room past the guard room in 
Lord British's castle. Player must find the 
secret door which connects these rooms. Search the lower 
right-hand corner of room.
Humility- In southeast corner of the village of Paws is a group 
of mountains. The player should see 
Wheatpin and talk to him first. Search the nook of the 
mountains.


LELEL ADVANCEMENT

LEVEL                     EXPERIENCE POINT RANGE
------------------------------------------------------------------
1				0000-0100
2				0101-0200
3				0201-0400
4				0401-0800
5				0801-1600
6				1601-3200
7				3201-6400
8				6401-????


SHOP LOCATION
FOOD:			Moonglow
			Britain
			Yew
			Skara Brae

HEALING:		Moonglow
			Britain
			Jhelom
			Yew
			Skara Brae

HERBS                   Moonglow
(REAGENTS)		Moonglow
			Skara Brae

INN			Moonglow
			Britain
			Jhelom
			Minoc
			Trinsic
			Skara Brae

PUB			Britain
			Jhelom
			Trinsic

WEAPONS                 Britain
			Jhelom
			Minoc
			Trinsic

ARMOUR                  Britain
			Jhelom
			Minoc
			Trinsic

GUILD SHOPS		Buccaneer's Den
			Vespe

HOW TO RAISE VIRTUES
HONESTY	Not cheating a shop which one is able 
(Reagents for instance)

COMPASSION		Allow good foe to flee from combat 
Flee from combat with good foe 
Give to beggar

VALOR                   Victory over evil foe

JUSTICE                 Not cheating a shop which one is able 
                        (Reagents for instance)
			Flee from combat with good foe

SACRIFICE		Give all of one's gold to a beggar
			Give blood at a Healing shop.
			Death of character in party

HONOR                   Not cheating a shop which one is able (Reagents for 
                        instance)
			Find any of the eight runes
			Find any of the eight stones
			Find the Book, Bell or Candle

SPIRITUALITY            Visit Seer in Lord British's Castle
			Meditate in any of the eight Shrines

HUMILTY                 Answer "Humility Question" in town humbly


HOW TO LOWER VIRTUES
HONESTY                 Get any of the chests in a town
                        Cheating at a shop which one is able (Reagents for 
                        instance)

COMPASSION              Attacking a good or NPC character (town 
                        folk for instance)

VALOR                   Lose in combat with an evil foe
			Fleeing from an evil foe when 
                        party is not wounded

JUSTICE                 Get any of the chests in a town
                        Cheating at a shop which one is able (Reagents for 
                        instance)

SACRIFICE		Fleeing from an evil foe when party is not wounded
			Not giving blood to Healing shop

HONOR                   Get any of the chests in a town
                        Cheating at a shop which one is able (Reagents for 
                        instance)
                        Attacking a good or NPC character (town folk for
                        instance)

SPIRITUALITY            Not meditating in a shrine once it has been entered

HUMILTY                 Answer "Humility Question" in town incorrectly



LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE COORDINATES
CASTLES
EMPATH ABBEY 			DC BM
LORD BRITISH                    GL FG
SERPENTS HOLD 			PB JC
THE LYCAEUM 			GL NK

DUNGEON
COVETOUS                        BL JM
DESTARD				KI El
DECEIT				EJ PA
DESPISE				ED FL
GREAT ABYSS                     OJ OJ
HYTHLOTHE                       PA OP
SHAME                           GG DK
WRONG				BE HO

GOODIES
BELL                            NA LA 
BLACK STONE                     IF OA 
BOOK                            AG AG 
CANDLE				AB BG
MANDRAKE ROOT			DG LG 
MYSTIC ARMOUR			AE BG 
MYSTIC WEAPONS			AP AI
NIGHTSHADE                      CM MN 
SILVER HORN                     KN CN 
SKULL                           PF MF
TELESCOPE                       AC BG
WHITE STONE                     FA FA
WHEEL                           NH GA

TOWNS
BRITAIN				GK FC
JHELOM                          NO CE
MAGINCIA                        KJ LL
MINOC                           BE JP
MOONGLOW                        IH OI
SKARA BRAE                      IA BG
TRINSIC				LI GK
YEW                             CL DK

VILLAGES
BUCCANEER'S DEN			JO II
COVE                            FK II
VESPER				DL MJ
PAWS                            JB GC

SHRINES
HONESTY				EC OJ
COMPASSION                      FM IA
VALOR                           OF CE
JUSTICE				AL EJ
SACRIFICE                       CN MN
HONOR                           MP FB
SPIRITUALITY                    BD KG
HUMILITY                        NI OH
                           
FINAL SOLUTION
	Once you complete the eighth level of the Stygian 
Abyss you will be taken to the Chamber of the 
Codex. Here you will be asked a number of questions. The 
answers to those questions are listed below, in 
the order they should be given.

VERAMOCOR
HONESTY
COMPASSION
VALOR
JUSTICE
SACRIFICE
HONOR
SPIRITUALITY
HUMILITY
TRUTH
LOVE
COURAGE
INFINITY
